\hypertarget{gauge-fields}{%
\subsection{Gauge Fields}\label{gauge-fields}}

The bond operators \(u_{ij}\) are useful because they label a bond
sector \(\mathcal{\tilde{L}}_u\) in which we can easiy solve the
Hamiltonian. However the gauge operators move us between bond sectors.
\textbf{Bond sectors are not gauge invariant!}

Let's consider instead the properties of the plaquette operators
\(\hat{\phi}_i\) that live on the faces of the lattice.

We already showed that they are conserved. And as one might hope and
expect, the plaquette operators map cleanly on to the bond operators of
the Majorana representation:

\[\begin{aligned}
\tilde{W}_p &= \prod_{\mathrm{i,j}\; \in\; p} \tilde{K}_{ij}\\
            &= \prod_{\mathrm{i,j}\; \in\; p} \tilde{\sigma}_i^\alpha \tilde{\sigma}_j^\alpha\\
            &= \prod_{\mathrm{i,j}\; \in\; p} (ib^\alpha_i c_i)(ib^\alpha_j c_j)\\
            &= \prod_{\mathrm{i,j}\; \in\; p} i u_{ij} c_i c_j\\
            &= \prod_{\mathrm{i,j}\; \in\; p} i u_{ij}
\end{aligned}\]

Where the last steps holds because each \(c_i\) appears exactly twice
and adjacent to its neighbour in each plaquette operator. Note that this
is consistent with the observation from earlier that each \(W_p\) takes
values \(\pm 1\) for even paths and \(\pm i\) for odd paths.

\hypertarget{vortices-and-their-movements}{%
\subsubsection{Vortices and their
movements}\label{vortices-and-their-movements}}

Let's imagine we started from the ground state of the model and flipped
the sign of a single bond. In doing so we will flip the sign of the two
plaquettes adjacent to that bond. I'll call these disturbed plaquettes
\emph{vortices}. I'll refer to a particular choice values for the
plaquette operators as a vortex sector.

If we chain multiple bond flips we can create a pair of vortices at
arbitrary locations. The chain of bonds that we must flip corresponds to
a path on the dual of the lattice.

Something else we can do is create a pair of vortices, move one around a
loop and then anhilate it with its partner. This corresponds to a closed
loop on the dual lattice and applying such a bond flip leaves the vortex
sector unchanged.

Notice that the \(D_j\) operators flip three bonds around a vertex. This
is the smallest closed loop around which one can move a vortex pair and
anhilate it with itself.

Such operations compose in the sense that we can build any larger loop
by applying a series of \(D_j\) operations. Indeed the symetrisation
procedure \(\prod_i \left( \frac{1 + D_i}{2}\right)\) that maps from the
bond sector to a physical state is applying constructing a superposition
over every such loop that leaves the vortex sector unchanged.

The only loops that we cannot build out of \(D_j\)s are non-contractible
loops, such as those that span the major or minor circumference of the
torus.

\textbf{The plaquette operators are the gauge invariant quantity that
determines the physics of the model}

\hypertarget{composition-of-u_jk-loops}{%
\subsubsection{\texorpdfstring{Composition of \(u_{jk}\)
loops}{Composition of u\_\{jk\} loops}}\label{composition-of-u_jk-loops}}

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:plaquette_addition_by_hand}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.57\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/plaquette_addition/plaquette_addition_by_hand.pdf}
\caption{In the product of individual plaquette operators shared bonds
cancel out. The product is equal to the enclosing
path.}\label{fig:plaquette_addition_by_hand}
}
\end{figure}

Second it is now easy to show that the loops and plaquettes satisfy nice
composition rules, so long as we stick to loops that wind in a
particular direction.

Consider the product of two non-overlapping loops \(W_a\) and \(W_b\)
that share an edge \(u_{12}\). Since the two loops both wind clockwise
and do not overlap, one will contain a term \(i u_{12}\) and the other
\(i u_{21}\). Since the \(u_{ij}\) commute with one another, they square
to \(1\) and \(u_{ij} = -u_{ji}\) we see have \(i u_{12} i u_{21} = 1\)
and we can repeat this for any number of shared edges. Hence, we get a
version of Stokes' theorem: the product of \(i u_{jk}\) around any
closed loop \(\partial A\) is equal to the product of plaquette
operators \(\Phi\) that span the area \(A\) enclosed by that loop:
\[\prod_{u_{jk} \in \partial A} i \; u_{jk} = \prod_{\phi_i \in A} \phi_i\]

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:stokes_theorem}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.71\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/stokes_theorem/stokes_theorem.pdf}
\caption{The loop composition rule extends to arbitrary numbers of
vortices giving a discrete version of Stoke's
theorem.}\label{fig:stokes_theorem}
}
\end{figure}

\textbf{Wilson loops can always be decomposed into products of
plaquettes operators unless they are non-contractable}

\hypertarget{gauge-degeneracy-and-the-euler-equation}{%
\subsubsection{Gauge Degeneracy and the Euler
Equation}\label{gauge-degeneracy-and-the-euler-equation}}

We can check this analysis with a counting argument. For a lattice with
\(B\) bonds, \(P\) plaquettes and \(V\) vertices we can count how many
bond sectors, vortices sectors and gauge symmetries there are and check
them against Euler's polyhedra equation.

Euler's equation states for a closed surface of genus \(g\), i.e that
has \(g\) holes so \(0\) for the sphere, \(1\) for the torus and \(g\)
for \(g\) tori stuck together \[B = P + V + 2 - 2g\]

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:torus}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.86\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/torus.jpeg}
\caption{In periodic boundary conditions the Kitaev model is defined on
the surface of a torus. Topologically the torus is distinct from the
sphere in that it has a hole that cannot be smoothly deformed away.
Associated with each such hole are two non-contractible loops on the
surface, here labeled A and B, that cannot be smoothly deformed to a
point. These two non-contracible loops can. be used to construct two
symmetry operators \(\hat{A}\) and \(\hat{A}\) that flip \(u_{jk}\)s
along their paths.}\label{fig:torus}
}
\end{figure}

For the case of the torus where \(g = 1\) we can rearrange this to read:
\[B = (P-1) + (V-1) + 2\]

Each \(u_{ij}\) takes two values and there is one associated with each
bond so there are exactly \(2^B\) distinct configurations of the bond
sector. Let's see if we can factor those configurations out into the
cartesian product of vortex sectors, gauge symmetries and
non-contractible loop operators.

Vortex sectors: each plaquette operator \(\phi_i\) takes two values
(\(\pm 1\) or \(\pm i\)) and there are \(P\) of them so naively one
would think there are \(2^P\). However vortices can only be created on
pairs so there are really \(\tfrac{2^P}{2} = 2^{P-1}\) vortex sectors.

Gauge symmetries: As discussed earlier these correspond to the all
possible compositions of the \(D_j\) operators. Again there are only
\(2^{V-1}\) of these because, as we will see in the next section,
\(\prod_{j} D_j = \mathbb{1}\) in the physical space, and we enforce
this by chooising the correct product of single particle fermion states.
You can get an intuitive picture for why \(\prod_{j} D_j = \mathbb{1}\)
by imagining larger and larger patches of \(D_j\) operators on the
torus. These patches correspond to transporting a vortex pair around the
edge of the patch. At some point the patch wraps around and starts to
cover the entire torus, as this happens the bounday of the patch
disappears and hence it which corresponds to the identity operation. See
Fig ?? (animated in the HTML version).

Finally the torus has two non-contractible loop operators asscociated
with its major and minor diameters.

Putting this all together we see that there are \textbf{\(2^B\) bond
sectors} a space which can be decomposed into the cartesian product of
\textbf{\(2^{P-1}\) vortex sectors}, \textbf{\(2^{V-1}\) gauge
symmetries} and \textbf{\(2^2 = 4\) topological sectors} associated with
the non-contractible loop operators. This last factor forms the basis of
proposals to construct topologically protected qubits since the 4
sectors cold only be mixed by a highly non-local perturbation, ref
?????.

\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/intro/types_of_dual_loops/types_of_dual_loops.pdf}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/intro/gauge_symmetries/gauge_symmetries.pdf}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/flood_fill/flood_fill.pdf}
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/flood_fill_amorphous/flood_fill_amorphous.pdf}

\hypertarget{counting-edges-plaquettes-and-vertices}{%
\subsubsection{Counting edges, plaquettes and
vertices}\label{counting-edges-plaquettes-and-vertices}}

It will be useful to know how the trivalent structre of the lattice
constraints the number of bonds \(B\), plaquettes \(P\) and vertices
\(V\) it has.

We can immediately see that the lattice is built from vertices that each
share 3 edges with their neighbours. This means each vertex comes with
\(\tfrac{3}{2}\) bonds i.e \(3V = 2B\). This is consistent with the fact
that in the Majorana representation on the torus each vertex brings
three \(b^\alpha\) operators which then pair along bonds to give \(3/2\)
bonds per vertex.

If we define an integer \(N\) such that \(V = 2N\) and \(B = 3N\) and
substitite this into the polyhedra equation for the torus we see that
\(P = N\). So if is a trivalent lattice on the torus has \(N\)
plaquettes, it has \(2N\) vertices and \(3N\) bonds.

We can also consider the sum of the number of bonds in each plaquette
\(S_p\), since each bond is a member of exactly two plaquettes
\[S_p = 2B = 6N\]

The mean size of a plaquette in a trivalent lattice on the torus is
exactly 6. Since the sum is even, this also tells us that all odd
plaquettes must come in pairs.

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:hilbert_spaces}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/hilbert_spaces.pdf}
\caption{The relationship between the different Hilbert spaces used in
the solution is slightly complex.}\label{fig:hilbert_spaces}
}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{the-projector}{%
\subsection{The Projector}\label{the-projector}}

It will turn out that the projection from the extended space to the
physical space is not actually that important for the results that I
will present. However it it useful to go through the theory of it to
explain why this is.

The physicil states are defined as those for which
\(D_i |\phi\rangle = |\phi\rangle\) for all \(D_i\). Since \(D_i\) has
eigenvalues \(\pm1\), the quantity \(\tfrac{(1+D_i)}{2}\) has eigenvalue
\(1\) for physical states and \(0\) for extended states so is the local
projector onto the physical subspace.

The global projector is therefore
\[ \mathcal{P} = \prod_{i=1}^{2N} \left( \frac{1 + D_i}{2}\right)\]

for a toroidal trivalent lattice with \(N\) plaquettes \(2N\) vertices
and \(3N\) edges. As I pointed out before the product over \((1 + D_j)\)
can also be thought of as the sum of all possible subsets \(\{i\}\) of
the \(D_j\) operators, which is the set of all possible gauge symmetry
operations.

\[ \mathcal{P} = \frac{1}{2^{2N}} \sum_{\{i\}} \prod_{i\in\{i\}} D_i\]

Since the gauge operators \(D_j\) commute and square to one, we can
define the complement operator \(C = \prod_{i=1}^{2N} D_i\) and see that
it take each set of \(\prod_{i \in \{i\}} D_j\) operators and gives us
the complement of that set. I said earlier that \(C\) is the identity in
the physical subspace and we will shortly see why.

We use the complement operator to rewrite the projector as a sum over
half the subsets of \(\{i\}\) let's call that \(\Lambda\). The
complement operator deals with the other half

\[ \mathcal{P} =  \left( \frac{1}{2^{2N-1}} \sum_{\Lambda} \prod_{i\in\{i\}} D_i\right) \left(\frac{1 + \prod_i^{2N} D_i}{2}\right) = \mathcal{S} \cdot \mathcal{P}_0\]

To compute \(\mathcal{P}_0\) the main quantity needed is the product of
the local projectors \(D_i\)
\[\prod_i^{2N} D_i = \prod_i^{2N} b^x_i b^y_i b^z_i c_i \] for a
toroidal trivalent lattice with \(N\) plaquettes \(2N\) vertices and
\(3N\) edges.

First we reorder the operators by bond type, this doesn't require any
information about the underlying lattice.

\[\prod_i^{2N} D_i = \prod_i^{2N} b^x_i \prod_i^{2N} b^y_i \prod_i^{2N} b^z_i \prod_i^{2N} c_i\]

The product over \(c_i\) operators reduces to a determinant of the Q
matrix and the fermion parity, see
\textcite{pedrocchiPhysicalSolutionsKitaev2011b}. The only difference
from the honeycomb case is that we cannot explicitely compute the
factors \(p_x,p_y,p_z = \pm\;1\) that arise from reordering the b
operators such that pairs of vertices linked by the corresponding bonds
are adjacent.

\[\prod_i^{2N} b^\alpha_i = p_\alpha \prod_{(i,j)}b^\alpha_i b^\alpha_j\]

However they are simply the parity of the permutation from one ordering
to the other and can be computed in linear time with a cycle
decomposition \textcite{app:cycle_decomp}.

We find that
\[\mathcal{P}_0 = 1 + p_x\;p_y\;p_z\; \hat{\pi} \; \mathrm{det}(Q^u) \; \prod_{\{i,j\}} -iu_{ij}\]

where \(p_x\;p_y\;p_z = \pm 1\) are lattice structure factors.
\(det(Q^u)\) is the determinant of the matrix mentioned earlier that
maps \(c_i\) operators to normal mode operators \(b'_i, b''_i\). These
depend only on the lattice structure.

\(\hat{\pi} = \prod{i}^{N} (1 - 2\hat{n}_i)\) is the parity of the
particular many body state determined by fermionic occupation numbers
\(n_i\). As discussed in
+\textcite{pedrocchiPhysicalSolutionsKitaev2011b} is \(\hat{\pi}\) is
gauge invariant in the sense that \([\hat{\pi}, D_i] = 0\).

This implies that \(det(Q^u) \prod -i u_{ij}\) is also a guage invariant
quantity. In translation invariant models this quantity which can be
related to the parity of the number of vortex pairs in the system
\textcite{yaoAlgebraicSpinLiquid2009}. However it is not so simple to
evaluate in the amorphous case.

More general
arguments\autocite{chungExplicitMonodromyMoore2007,oshikawaTopologicalDegeneracyNonAbelian2007}
imply that \(det(Q^u) \prod -i u_{ij}\) has an interesting relationship
to the topological fluxes. In the non-Abelian phase we expect that it
will change sign in exactly on of the four topological sectors. This
forces that sector that contain a fermion and hence gives the model a
three-fold degerenate ground state. In the Abelian phase this doesn't
happen and we get a fourfold degerate ground state. Whether this
analysis generalises to the amorphous case in unclear.

An alternate way to view this is to consider the adiabatic insertion of
the fluxes \(\Phi_{x,y}\) as the operations that undo vortex transport
around the lattice. In this picture the three fold degeneracy occurs
because transporting a vortex around \textbf{both} the major and minor
axes of the torus changes its fusion channel such that the two vortices
fuse into a fermion excition rather than the vacuum.

All these factors take values \(\pm 1\) so \(\mathcal{P}_0\) is 0 or 1
for a particular state. Since \(\mathcal{S}\) corresponds to
symmetrising over all the gauge configurations and cannot be 0, this
tells use that once we have determined the single particle eigenstates
of a bond sector, the true many body ground state has the same energy as
either the empty state with \(n_i = 0\) or a state with a single fermion
in the lowest level.

Let's think about where are with the model now. We can map the spin
Hamiltonian to a Majorana Hamiltonian in an extended Hilbert space.
Along with that mapping comes a gauge field \(u_{jk}\) defining
\textbf{bond sectors}. The gauge symmetries of \(u_{jk}\) are generated
by the set of \(D_j\) operators. The gauge invariant and therefore
physically relevant variables are the plaquette operators \(\phi_i\)
which define as a \textbf{vortex sector}. In order to practically solve
the Majorana Hamiltonian we must remove hats from the gauge field by
restricting ourselves to a particular bond sector. From there the
Majorana Hamiltonian becomes non-interacting and we can solve it like
any quadratic theory. This lets us construct the single particle
eigenstates from which we can also construct many body states. However
the many body states constructed this way are not in the physical
subspace!

However for the many body states within a particular bond sector,
\(\mathcal{P}_0 = 0,1\) tells us which of those have some overlap with
the physical sector.

We see that finding a state that has overlap with a physical state only
ever requires the addition or removal of one fermion. There are cases
where this can make a difference but for most observables such as ground
state energy this correction scales away as the number of fermions in
the system grows.

If we wanted to construct a full many body wavefunction in the spin
basis we would need to include the full symmetrisation over the gauge
fields. However this was not necessary for any of the results that will
be presented here.

\hypertarget{the-ground-state}{%
\subsection{The Ground State}\label{the-ground-state}}

As we have shown that the Hamiltonian is gauge invariant, only the flux
sector and the two topological fluxes affect the spectrum of the
Hamiltonian. Thus we can label many body ground state by a combination
of flux sector and fermionic occupation numbers.

By studying the projector we saw that the fermionic occupation numbers
of the ground state will always be either \(n_m = 0\) or
\(n_0 = 1, n_{m>1} = 0\) because the projector really just enforces
vortex and fermion parity.

I refer to the flux sector that contains the ground state as the ground
state flux sector. Recall that we call the excitations of the fluxes
away from the ground ground state configuration \textbf{vortices}, so
that the ground state flux sector is the vortex free sector by
definition.

On the Honeycomb, Lieb's theorem implies that the the ground state
corresponds to the state where all \(u_{jk} = 1\) implying that the flux
free sector is the ground state sector \textcite{lieb_flux_1994}.

Lieb's theorem does not generalise easily to the amorphous case. However
we can get some intuition by examining the problem that will lead to a
guess for the ground state. We will then provide numerical evidence that
this guess is in fact correct.

Let's consider the partition function of the Majorana hamiltonian:
\[ \mathcal{Z} = \mathrm{Tr}\left( e^{-\beta H}\right) = \sum_i \exp{-\beta \epsilon_i}\]
At low temperatures \(\mathcal{Z} \approx \beta \epsilon_0\) where
\(\epsilon_0\) is the lowest energy fermionic state.

How does the \(\mathcal{Z}\) depend on the Majorana hamiltonian?
Expanding the exponential out gives:
\[ \mathcal{Z} = \sum_n \frac{(-\beta)^n}{n!} \mathrm{Tr(H^k)} \]

Now there's an interesting observation to make here. The Hamiltonian is
essentially a scaled adjacency matrix. An adjacency matrix being a
matrix \(g_{ij}\) such that \(g_{ij} = 1\) if vertices \(i\) and \(j\)
and joined by an edge and 0 otherwise.

Powers of adjacency matrices have the property that the entry
\((g^n)_{ij}\) corresponds to the number of paths of length n on the
graph that begin at site \(i\) and end at site \(j\). These include
somewhat degenerate paths that go back on themselves etc.

The trace of an adjacency matrix
\[\mathrm{Tr}(g^n) = \sum_i (g^n)_{ii}\] therefore counts the number
number of loops of size \(n\) that can be drawn on the graph.

Applying the same treatment to our Majorana Hamiltonian, we can
interpret \(u_ij\) to equal 0 if the two sites are not joined by a bond
and we put ourselves in the isotropic phase where \(J^\alpha = 1\)
\[ \tilde{H}_{ij} =  \tfrac{1}{2} i u_{ij}\]

We then see that the trace of the nth power of H is a sums over Wilson
loops of size \(n\) with an additional factor of \(2^{-n}\). We showed
earlier that the Wilson loop operators can always be written as products
of the plaquette operators that they enclose.

Lumping all the prefactors together, we can write:
\[ \mathcal{Z} = c_A \hat{A} + c_B \hat{B} + \sum_i c_i \hat{\phi}_i + \sum_{ij} c_{ij}  \hat{\phi}_i \hat{\phi}_j + \sum_{ijk} c_{ijk}  \hat{\phi}_i \hat{\phi}_j \hat{\phi}_k + ...\]

Where the \(c\) factors would be something like
\[c_{ijk...} = \sum_n \tfrac{(-\beta)^n}{n!} \tfrac{1}{2^n} K_{ijk...}\]
which is a sum over all loop lengths \(n\) and for each we have a
combinatoral factor \(K_{ijk...}\) that counts how many ways there are
to draw a loop of length \(n\) that only encloses plaquettes \(ijk...\).

We also have the pesky non-contractible loop operators \(\hat{A}\) and
\(\hat{B}\). Again the prefactors for these are very complicated but we
can intuitively see that for larger and larger loops lengths there will
be a combinatorial explosion of possible ways that they appear in these
sums. These are suppressed exponentially with system size but at
practical lattice sizes they cause significant finite size effects. The
main evidence of this is that the 4 loop sectors spanned by the
\(\hat{A}\) and \(\hat{B}\) operators are degenerate in the infinite
system size limit, while that degeneracy is lifted in finite sized
systems.

We don't have much hope of actually evaluating this for an amorphous
lattice. However it lead us to guess that the ground state vortex sector
might be a simple function of the side length of each plaquette.

The ground state of the Amorphous Kitaev Model is found by setting the
flux through each plaquette \(\phi\) to be equal to
\(\phi^{\mathrm{g.s.}}(n_{\mathrm{sides}})\)

\[\begin{aligned}
    \phi^{\mathrm{g.s.}}(n_{\mathrm{sides}}) = -(\pm i)^{n_{\mathrm{sides}}},
\end{aligned}\] where \(n_{\mathrm{sides}}\) is the number of edges that
form each plaquette and the choice of sign gives a twofold chiral ground
state degeneracy.

This conjecture is consistent with Lieb's theorem on regular lattices
\autocite{lieb_flux_1994} and is supported by numerical evidence. As
noted before, any flux that differs from the ground state is an
excitation which I call a vortex.

\hypertarget{finite-size-effects}{%
\subsubsection{Finite size effects}\label{finite-size-effects}}

This guess only works for larger lattices because of the finite size
effects. In order to rigorously test it we would like to directly
enumerate the \(2^N\) vortex sectors for a smaller lattice and check
that the lowest state found is the vortex sector predicted by ???.

To do this we tile use an amorphous lattice as the unit cell of a
periodic \(N\times N\) system. Bonds that originally crossed the
periodic boundaries now connect adjacent unit cells. Using Bloch's
theorem the problem then essnetially reduces back to the single
amorphous unit cell but now the edges that cross the periodic boundaries
pick up a phase dependent on the crystal momentum
\(\vex{q} = (q_x, q_y)\) and the lattice vector of the bond
\(\vec{x} = (+1, 0, -1, +1, 0, -1)\). Assigning these lattice vectors to
each bond is also a very conveninent way to store and plot toroidal
graphs.

This can then be solved using Bloch's theorem. For a given crystal
momentum \(\textbf{q} \in [0,2\pi)^2\), we are left with a Bloch
Hamiltonian, which is identical to the original Hamiltonian aside from
an extra phase on edges that cross the periodic boundaries in the \(x\)
and \(y\) directions, \[\begin{aligned}
    M_{jk}(\textbf{q}) =  \frac{i}{2} J^{\alpha} u_{jk} e^{i q_{jk}},\end{aligned}\]
where \(q_{jk} = q_x\) for a bond that crosses the \(x\)-periodic
boundary in the positive direction, with the analogous definition for
\(y\)-crossing bonds. We also have \(q_{jk} = -q_{kj}\). Finally
\(q_{jk} = 0\) if the edge does not cross any boundaries at all -- in
essence we are imposing twisted boundary conditions on our system. The
total energy of the tiled system can be calculated by summing the energy
of \(M( \textbf{q})\) for every value of \(\textbf{q}\). The use of a
fourier series then allows us to compute the diagonalisation with a
penalty only linear in the number of tiles used compared to
diagonalising a single lattice. With this technique the finite size
effects related to the non-contractible loop operators are removed with
only a linear penalty in computation time compared to the exponential
penalty paid by simply simply diagonalising larger lattices.

Using this technique we verified that \(\phi_0\) correctly predicts the
ground state for hundreds of thousands of lattices with upto 20
plaquettes. For larger lattices we verified that random perturbations
around the predicted ground state never yield a lower energy state.

\hypertarget{chiral-symmetry}{%
\subsubsection{Chiral Symmetry}\label{chiral-symmetry}}

In the discussion above we see that the ground state has a twofold
\textbf{chiral} degeneracy that comes about because the global sign of
the odd plaquettes does not matter.

This happens because by adding odd plaquettes we have broken the time
reversal symmetry of the original model
\autocite{Chua2011,yaoExactChiralSpin2007,ChuaPRB2011,Fiete2012,Natori2016,Wu2009,Peri2020,WangHaoranPRB2021}.

Similar to the behaviour of the original Kitaev model in response to a
magnetic field, we get two degenerate ground states of different
handedness. Practicaly speaking, one ground state is related to the
other by inverting the imaginary \(\phi\) fluxes
\autocite{yaoExactChiralSpin2007}.

\hypertarget{phases-of-the-kitaev-model}{%
\subsection{Phases of the Kitaev
Model}\label{phases-of-the-kitaev-model}}

discuss the abelian A phase / toric code phase / anisotropic phase

the isotropic gapless phase of the standard model

The isotropic gapped phase with the addition of a magnetic field

\hypertarget{whats-so-great-about-two-dimensions}{%
\subsection{What's so great about two
dimensions?}\label{whats-so-great-about-two-dimensions}}

\hypertarget{topology-chirality-and-edge-modes}{%
\subsubsection{Topology, chirality and edge
modes}\label{topology-chirality-and-edge-modes}}

Most thermodynamic and quantum phases studied can be characterised by a
local order parameter. That is, a function or operator that only
requires knowledge about some fixed sized patch of the system that does
not scale with system size.

However there are quantum phases that cannot be characterised by such a
local order parameter. These phases are intead said to posess
`topological order'.

One property of topological order that is particularly easy to observe
that the ground state degeneracy depends on the topology of the manifold
that we put the system on to. This is referred to as topological
degeneracy to distinguish it from standard symmetry breaking.

The Kitaev model will be a good example of this, we have already looked
at it defined on a graph that is embedded either into the plane or onto
the torus. The extension to surfaces like the torus but with more than
one handle is relatively easy.

\hypertarget{anyonic-statistics}{%
\subsubsection{Anyonic Statistics}\label{anyonic-statistics}}

In dimensions greater than two, the quantum state of a system must pick
up a factor of \(-1\) or \(+1\) if two identical particles are swapped.
We call these Fermions and Bosons.

This argument is predicated on the idea that performing two swaps is
equivalent to doing nothing. Doing nothing should not change the quantum
state at all, so doing one swap can at most multiply it by \(\pm 1\).

However there are many hidden parts to this argument. Firstly, this
argument just isn't the whole story, if you want to know why Fermions
have half integer spin, for instance, you have to go to field theory.

There is also a second niggle, why does this argument only work in
dimensions greater than two? What we're really saying when we say that
two swaps do nothing is that the world lines of two particles that have
been swapped twice can be untangled without crossing. Why can't they
cross? Well because if they cross then the particles can interact and
the quantum state could change in an arbitrary way. We're implcitly
using the locality of physics here to argue that if the worldlines stay
well separated then the overall quantum state cannot too much.

In two dimensions we cannot untangle the worldlines of two particles
that have swapped places, they are braided together. See
\cref{fig:braiding} for a diagram.

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:braiding}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.71\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/braiding.png}
\caption{}\label{fig:braiding}
}
\end{figure}

From this fact flows a whole new world of behaviours, now the quantum
state can aquire a phase factor \(e^{i\phi}\) upon exchange of two
identical particles, which we now call Anyons.

The Kitaev Model is a good demonstration of the connection beween Anyons
and topological degeneracy. In the Kitaev model we can create a pair of
vortices, move one around a non-contractable loop \(\mathcal{T}_{x/y}\)
and then anhilate them together. Without topology this should leave the
quantum state unchanged. Instead it moves us to another ground state in
a topologically degenerate ground state subspace. Practically speaking
it flips a dual line of bonds \(u_{jk}\) going around the loop which we
cannot undo with any gauge transformation made from \(D_j\) operators.

If the ground state subspace is multidimensional, quasiparticle exchange
can move us around in the space with an action corresponding to a
matrix. These matrices do not in general commmute and so these are known
as non-Abelian anyons.

From here things get even more complex, the Kitaev model has a
non-Abelian phase when exposed to a magnetic field, and the amorphous
Kitaev Model has a non-Abelian phase because of its broken chiral
symmetry.

The way that we have subdivided the Kitaev model into vortex sectors, we
have a neat separation beween vortices and fermionic excitations.
However if we looked at the full many body picture we would see that a
vortex caries with it a cloud of bound majorana states.

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:majorana_bound_states}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/majorana_bound_states/majorana_bound_states.pdf}
\caption{(Left) A large amorphous lattice in the ground state save for a
single pair of vortices shown in red, separated by the string of bonds
that we flipped to create them. (Right) The density of the lowest energy
Majorana state in this vortex sector. The state is clearly bound to the
vortices.}\label{fig:majorana_bound_states}
}
\end{figure}

Consider two processes

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi})}
\item
  We transport one half of a vortex pair around either the x or y loops
  of the torus before anhilating back to the ground state vortex sector
  \(\mathcal{T}_{x,y}\).
\item
  We flip a line of bond operators coresponding to measuring the flux
  through either the major or minor axes of the torus
  \(\mathcal{\Phi}_{x,y}\)
\end{enumerate}

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:loops_and_dual_loops}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=1.14\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/loops_and_dual_loops/loops_and_dual_loops.pdf}
\caption{(Left) The two topological flux operators of the toroidal
lattice, these don't correspond to any face of the lattice, but rather
measure flux that threads through the major and minor axes of the torus.
This shows a particular choice but any loop that crosses the boundary is
gauge equivalent to one of or the sum of these two loop. (Right) The two
ways to transport vortices around the diameters. These correspond to
creating a vortex pair, transporting one of them around the major or
minor diameters of the torus and then anhilating them
again.}\label{fig:loops_and_dual_loops}
}
\end{figure}

The plaquette operators \(\phi_i\) are associated with fluxes. Wilson
loops that wind the torus are associated with the fluxes through its two
diameters \(\mathcal{\Phi}_{x,y}\).

In the Abelian phase we can move a vortex along any path we like and
then when we bring them back together they will anhilate back to the
vacuum, where we understand `the vacuum' to refer to one of the ground
states, though not necesarily the same one we started in. We can use
this to get from the \((\Phi_x, \Phi_y) = (+1, +1)\) ground state and
construct the set \((+1, +1), (+1, -1), (-1, +1), (-1, -1)\).

\begin{figure}
\hypertarget{fig:topological_fluxes}{%
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.57\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/topological_fluxes.png}
\caption{Wilson loops that wind the major or minor diameters of the
torus measure flux winding through the hole of the donut/torus or
through the filling. If they made donuts that had both a jam filling and
a hole this analogy would be a lot easier to make
\textcite{parkerWhyDoesThis}.}\label{fig:topological_fluxes}
}
\end{figure}

However in the non-Abelian phase we have to wrangle with monodromy
\autocite{chungExplicitMonodromyMoore2007,oshikawaTopologicalDegeneracyNonAbelian2007}.
Monodromy is behaviour of objects as they move around a singularity.
This manifests here in that the identity of a vortex and cloud of
Majoranas can change as we wind them around the torus in such a way that
rather than anhilating to the vacuum the anhilate to create an excited
state instead of a ground state. This means we end up with only three
degenerate ground states in the non-Abelian phase
\((+1, +1), (+1, -1), (-1, +1)\)
\autocite[yaoAlgebraicSpinLiquid2009a]{chungTopologicalQuantumPhase2010}.
The way that this shows up concretly is that the projector enforces both
flux and fermion parity. When we wind a vortex around both
non-contractible loops of the torus, it flips the flux parity which
forces means we have to introduce a fermionic excitation to make the
state physical. Hence the process does not give a fourth ground state.

\includegraphics[width=0.86\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/threefold_degeneracy.png}
\includegraphics[width=1.14\textwidth,height=\textheight]{figure_code/amk_chapter/state_decomposition_animated/state_decomposition_animated.pdf}

One reason the topology has gained interest recently is there have
proposals to use this ground state degeneracy to implement both
passively fault tolerant and actively stabilised quantum computations
{[}\textcite{kitaevFaulttolerantQuantumComputation2003};
\textcite{poulinStabilizerFormalismOperator2005};
hastingsDynamicallyGeneratedLogical2021{]}.
